---
layout: post
title: QCon London 2026 conference notes
comments: true
tags: [qcon,conference]
---

## State of Play: AI Coding Assistants (Birgitta Bockeler)

- Context engineering - questions to ask yourself
  - What coding conventions should we amplify? Use skills
  - What workflows should we build for modernisation initiatives? Use subagents + skills
  - What tools should be available in your org? Use CLIs, MCP servers, LSPs
- Code migrations are a great use case for gen AI
- Claude Code/Gemini CLI etc. can be run in CI (e.g. for code reviews)
- There is a need for dev sandboxes in which to run coding agents
- Assess risk to use vs not use AI:
  - Probability that AI gets something wrong
  - Impact if AI gets something wrong
  - Detectability if AI get something wrong
- After completing the risk assessment consider:
  - For which workflow should we use coding agents?
  - How much review should we do?
  - How long should we run agents w/o human supervision?
- Consider lethal trifecta as described by SimonW:
  - Access to private data
  - Ability to communicate externally
  - Exposure to untrusted content (via prompts)
- Is it easy to sandbox coding agents? Dev containers?
- To increase effectiveness of coding agents, harness engineering is required
  - Context engineering
  - Architectural constraints (linters, structural tests)
    - Structural tests (e.g. external SDKs can be imported only from files in client/ dir) should fail with an error message that contains context for coding agents
  - Garbage collection (refactoring, simplification)
- Harness = The collection of items that feed forward (e.g. guides, arch docs) information to the agent and feed back after the agent made changes (e.g. linters, tests) such that the agent can operate in a self-correcting manner with steering from a human
- Will harness templates and harnessable topologies become a new abstraction layer in software engineering?

## Scaling the unknown: Performance in the AI era (monday.com)

- Cost of coding collapsed, cost of running/operating software did not
- Everyone expects configurable workflows now
- Users have same performance expectations but you no longer have control over the code (if you allow users to vibe code their own solutions on top of your product) => you need a corresponding architecture to ensure perf does not tank
    - Core vs playground architecture
      - Core: Small, contained modules that need to be performant and resilient. If someone brings this down, you need to fix it
      - Playground: Freedom for users to create what they want using agents you provide that implement guardrails 
- Also measurements/metrics need to adapt. When you do not control flows you need more generic measurements that are consistent across very different workflows (e.g. nr of objects returned for a request)
- Support can become a nightmare. Users expect you to support them for workflows they have created by themselves

## From Pilot to Impact: How AI is Transforming Large-Scale Engineering (ING)

- In 2023 ING started using AI assisted software engineering => 10% productivity gains
- When coding is fast/cheap downstream steps (test, deploy) in the SDLC become the bottleneck => we need to speed these up as well
- They created an AI platform that standardizes building blocks for agent assisted development => reduce variation
- Once you have a great AI platform, adoption is the next big challenge. Ideas:
  - AI hackathons
  - Build a community that helps others
  - SRE teams have been trained and are increasing adoption for teams they are working with
  - Embed experts/coaches in teams for ~0.5d
- Measure the impact of AI, don't guess
  - Multiple metrics from different angles are required
  - Check if all/most metrics tell you the same story before jumping to conclusions
- At ING measure productivity gain from AI assistance tools (Copilot) is ~10-20%
  - Software engineers typically write code ~50% of working hours